This chapter discusses Reinforcement Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF), a set of techniques using AI models to generate or augment feedback data for training language models, primarily as a cheaper alternative to human feedback. It highlights Anthropic's Constitutional AI (CAI) as the seminal example of RLAIF, which uses a predefined set of principles (a 'constitution') to guide AI in generating critiques of model outputs and creating synthetic pairwise preference data for RLHF training. The text contrasts human feedback (high-noise, low-bias) with AI feedback (low-noise, high-bias) and notes the emergence of specialized LLMs designed for judgment and evaluation tasks (like Shepherd, Prometheus). It concludes by mentioning ongoing research, including OpenAI's use of a 'Model Spec' for alignment and Anthropic's continued development and application of CAI, alongside open-source efforts and variations focusing on principle-driven alignment methods.13 Constitutional AI & ΑΙ Feedback
RL from AI Feedback (RLAIF) is a larger set of techniques for using AI to augment or generate feedback data, including pairwise preferences (source: Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with ai feedback from 2023 source: A critical evaluation of AI feedback for aligning large language models. from 2024 source: Suppressing pink elephants with direct principle feedback. from 2024). There are many motivations to using RLAIF to either entirely replace human feedback or augment it. AI models are far cheaper than humans, with a single piece of human preference data costing on the order of $1 or higher (or even above $10 per prompt), AI feedback with a frontier AI model, such as GPT-40 costs less than $0.01. This cost difference opens the market of experimentation with RLHF methods to an entire population of people previously priced out. Other than price, AI feedback introduces different tradeoffs on performance than human feedback, which are still being investigated. The peak performance for AI feedback is at least in the same ballpark of human data on skill-based evaluations, but it is not studied if human data allows finer control of the models in real-world product settings or for newer training methods such as character training.
The term RLAIF was introduced in Anthropic's work Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback (source: Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback from 2022), which resulted in initial confusion in the AI community over the relationship between the methods. Since the release of the Constitutional AI (CAI) paper and the formalization of RLAIF, RLAIF has become a default method within the post-training and RLHF literatures - there are far more examples than one can easily enumerate. The relationship should be understood as CAI was the example that kickstarted the broader field of RLAIF.
A rule of thumb for the difference between human data and AI feedback data is as follows:
1. Human data is high-noise and low-bias,
2. Synthetic preference data is low-noise and high-bias,
Results in many academic results showing how one can substitute AI preference data in RLHF workflows and achieve strong evaluation scores (source: Hybrid preferences: Learning to route instances for human vs. AI feedback from 2024), but shows how the literature of RLHF is separated from industrial best practices.
13.1 Constitutional AI
The method of Constitutional AI (CAI), which Anthropic uses extensively in their Claude models, is the earliest, large-scale use of synthetic data for RLHF training. Constitutional AI has two uses of synthetic data:
1. Critiques of instruction-tuned data to follow a set of principles like "Is the answer encouraging violence" or "Is the answer truthful." When the model generates answers to questions, it checks the answer against the list of principles in the constitution, refining the answer over time. Then, they fine-tune the model on this resulting dataset.
2. Generates pairwise preference data by using a language model to answer which completion was better, given the context of a random principle from the constitution (similar to this paper for principle-guided reward models). Then, RLHF proceeds as normal with synthetic data, hence the RLAIF name.
Largely, CAI is known for the second half above, the preference data, but the methods introduced for instruction data are used in general data filtering and synthetic data generation methods across post-training.
CAI can be formalized as follows.
By employing a human-written set of principles, which they term a constitution, Bai et al. 2022 use a separate LLM to generate artificial preference and instruction data used for fine-tuning (source: Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback from 2022). A constitution C is a set of written principles indicating specific aspects to focus on during a critique phase. The instruction data is curated by repeatedly sampling a principle from the constitution and asking the model to revise its latest output to the prompt to align with that principle. This yields a series of instruction variants representing revised outputs based on critique principles used for critique. The final data point is the prompt together with the final completion, for some number of revisions.
The preference data is constructed in a similar, yet simpler way by using a subset of principles from the constitution as context for a feedback model. The feedback model is presented with a prompt, a set of principles representing the context, and two completions labeled as answers (A) and (B) from a previous RLHF dataset. The feedback models' probability of outputting either (A) or (B) is recorded as a training sample for the reward model
13.2 Specific LLMs for Judgement
As RLAIF and LLM-as-a-judge has become more prevalent, many have wondered if we should be using the same models for generating responses as those for generating critiques or ratings. Multiple models have been released with the goal of substituting for frontier models as a data labeling tool, such as critic models Shepherd (source: Shepherd: A critic for language model generation from 2023) and CriticLLM (source: CritiqueLLM: Towards an informative critique generation model for evaluation of large language model generation from 2023) or models for evaluating response performance akin to Auto-J (source: Generative judge for evaluating alignment from 2023), Prometheus (source: Prometheus: Inducing fine-grained evaluation capability in language models from 2023), Prometheus 2 (source: Prometheus 2: An open source language model specialized in evaluating other language models from 2024), or Prometheus-Vision (source: Prometheus-vision: Vision-language model as a judge for fine-grained evaluation from 2024) but they are not widely adopted in documented training recipes.
13.3 Further Reading
There are many related research directions and extensions of Constitutional AI, but few of them have been documented as clear improvements in RLHF and post-training recipes. For now, they are included as further reading.
• OpenAI has released a Model Spec (source: Introducing the model spec. from 2024), which is a document stating the intended behavior for their models, and stated that they are exploring methods for alignment where the model references the document directly (which could be seen as a close peer to CAI). OpenAI has continued and trained their reasoning models such as ol with a method called Deliberative Alignment (source: Deliberative alignment: Reasoning enables safer language models from 2024) to align the model while referencing these safety or behavior policies.
• Anthropic has continued to use CAI in their model training, updating the constitution Claude uses (source: Claude's constitution. from 2024) and experimenting with how population collectives converge on principles for models and how that changes model behavior (source: Collective constitutional AI: Aligning a language model with public input. from 2023).
• The open-source community has explore replications of CAI applied to open datasets (source: Constitutional AI recipe from 2024) and for explorations into creating dialogue data between LMs (source: Self-directed synthetic dialogues and revisions technical report from 2024).
• Other work has used principle-driven preferences or feedback with different optimization methods. (source: Principle-driven self-alignment of language models from scratch with minimal human supervision from 2023) uses principles as context for the reward models, which was used to train the Dromedary models (source: SALMON: Self-alignment with principle-following reward models from 2024). (source: Improving alignment of dialogue agents via targeted human judgements from 2022) uses principles to improve the accuracy of human judgments in the RLHF process.